# OpenAPI

The documentation of the API (at least the [backend template](../templates/getting-started.md#backend--eai) for now) follows the [OpenAPI specification](https://spec.openapis.org/oas/latest.html).
The OpenAPI definition is generated by scanning the Spring `@Controller`'s, which serve as the Single Source of Truth.
Thus, the documentation of the API is not saved anywhere permanent inside the codebase and generated on-the-fly only.

The next sections provide an overview how the documentation is integrated and explains the usage.

## Available documentation endpoints

The OpenAPI documentation is exposed via two endpoints explained below.
Both endpoints will be dynamically updated based on the current annotations and Javadoc present in the `@Controller` code.

### Swagger UI

The [Swagger UI](https://swagger.io/tools/swagger-ui/) provides a web-based interface for exploring and testing the documented API.
It is automatically available when using `springdoc-openapi-starter-webmvc-ui` (which is included in the backend template by default) and can be accessed via the following path:

- `/swagger-ui/index.html` or
- `/swagger-ui` (shortform)

This endpoint renders the OpenAPI specification in a user-friendly format and allows direct interaction with all available endpoints.

### OpenAPI

The raw OpenAPI specification is served as machine-readable `.json` and `.yaml`.
It can be retrieved from the following standard paths:

- `/v3/api-docs` (`.json`) or
- `/v3/api-docs.yaml`

These endpoints are normally used for client generation, validation or export of the documentation as this is a standardized format for any OpenAPI generator.

## Documenting endpoints

Currently, there are two ways to add documentation to an endpoint. Those will be further explained below.

::: info Information
We suggest to combine both mechanisms and provide the basic API documentation via Javadoc enriched via advanced metadata where necessary using annotations.
:::

### Javadoc (suggested)

Documenting the various endpoints via Javadoc is the more intuitive way and has other benefits for generation of documentation and IDE support.
By documenting a method with basic Javadoc the generator will supply information directly to the OpenAPI documentation.

::: info Information
Using Javadoc only allows the documentation of a description, the variables used for the request and the return value.
Examples for a request are automatically created with default values.
:::

More information about the Javadoc integration can be found in the [official Springdoc documentation](https://springdoc.org/#javadoc-support).

Example:

```java
/**
 * This text is used as a description for the following request.
 * @param someId describes the path variable used for this request.
 * @return explains the return value of the request.
 */
@GetMapping("{someId}")
@ResponseStatus(HttpStatus.OK)
public SomeEntity getEndpoint(@PathVariable("someId") final UUID someId) {
    return service.doSth(someId);
}
```

### Swagger Annotations

In addition to Javadoc, it's possible to document endpoints using OpenAPI-specific annotations.
This approach offers much finer control over the generated documentation, allowing for custom examples, detailed descriptions, response codes, parameter specifications, and security requirements.

Annotation-based documentation is especially useful when more structured metadata is needed, such as for standardized response objects or complex request examples.

A full list of available annotations can be found in the [Swagger OpenAPI documentation](https://github.com/swagger-api/swagger-core/wiki/Swagger-2.X---Annotation)

Example:

```java
@Operation(
    summary = "Your summary here",
    description = "This text is used as a description for the following request.",
    parameters = {
        @Parameter(
            name = "someId",
            description = "someId for an entity",
            required = true,
            in = ParameterIn.PATH,
            example = "a81bc81b-dead-4e5d-abff-90865d1e13b1"
        )
    }
)
@ApiResponses(value = {
    @ApiResponse(
        responseCode = "200",
        description = "Entity for someId was found"
    ),
    @ApiResponse(responseCode = "404", description = "SomeEntity not found"),
})
@GetMapping("{someId}")
@ResponseStatus(HttpStatus.OK)
public SomeEntity getEndpoint(@PathVariable("someId") final UUID someId) {
  return service.doSth(someId);
}
```

## Generating API specification

An OpenApi specification for the backend API layer (e.g. controllers and DTOs) can be generated locally as a `.yaml` file using the [Springdoc Maven plugin](https://springdoc.org/#maven-plugin).

This is useful for different use-cases e.g.:

- OpenAPI-based client generation
- External documentation processing

The export is performed in the backend via the following command:

```shell
mvn springdoc-openapi:generate
```

::: info Information
The backend component must be running during this process, because the plugin fetches the OpenAPI specification via its `/v3/api-docs` endpoint.
:::

Further notice, every controller should be annotated as follows:

```java
@RequestMapping(value = "/theEntity", produces = MediaType.APPLICATION_JSON_VALUE)
@SecurityRequirement(name = OpenAPIDocumentationConfiguration.SECURITY_SCHEME_NAME)
```

On the `@RequestMapping`, the `produces` media type is explicitly defined to ensure that the generated specification uses the correct media type (`application/json`) instead of the generic `*/*`.
The `@SecurityRequirement` annotation indicates that this controller is secured using the global `WebAuthConfiguration`. Adjust this as required based on your project’s security setup.
Neither of these annotations affects OpenAPI client generation. They only improve the accuracy and completeness of the generated specification.

The OpenAPI `.yaml` file will be saved in the backend's `api-spec` folder.
The filename is derived from the Maven artifact defined inside the `pom.xml`.
By default, this file is and should be versioned controlled as it may be used inside the [following step](#generating-api-client-from-specification).

::: danger IMPORTANT
Changing the name or location via plugin configuration is highly discouraged, as other features (e.g., client generation) might depend on the default / RefArch plugin configuration.
The generated OpenApi specification must not be edited manually as any generated file. Instead, regenerate it from backend sources using the previously described Maven plugin.
:::

## Generating API client from specification

The generator is configured via the `openapitools.json` file in the frontend / webcomponent project, which references the exported OpenAPI specification from the backend.
The generated API specification from the [previous step](#generating-api-specification) can be used to generate Api clients for the [frontend or webcomponent template](../templates/getting-started.md#frontend-web-components).
For this purpose the [`@openapitools/openapi-generator-cli`](https://openapi-generator.tech/docs/usage) dependency was added.

For this the `@openapitools/openapi-generator-cli` dependency is used, which can be started via the `pre-build` script. This script will be automatically called while using the `build` or `lint` script.

```json:line-numbers=10
  "scripts": {
    ...
    "pre-build": "openapi-generator-cli generate", // [!code focus]
    ...
  },
```

::: info First usage

After installing the new dependency, we recommend to execute the following script before first usage.
Otherwise, the npm-script might still throw an error upon execution as it could not download the `openapi-generator-cli-X.X.X.jar` while using a proxy.
This `.jar` file is required, as it contains the actual generator.
The npm dependency only provides a wrapper around this `.jar`.

::: code-group

```shell [shell]
./download-openapi-jar.sh
```

```shell [bash]
./download-openapi-jar.bat
```

This shell script automatically extracts the needed version from the `openapitools.json`, downloads the needed `.jar` and places into your `node_modules` folder.

This script needs to be executed each time you update the version inside your `openapitools.json`.
:::

### Typical workflow

1. Generate / Update the OpenAPI specification in the backend (see [Generating API specification](#generating-api-specification))
2. Run `npm run build` or `npm run lint` inside the frontend or webcomponent project

If multiple clients (e.g. based on different specifications) are to be generated, the configuration in `openapitools.json` must be adapted accordingly.
Otherwise, no modifications are necessary, as the default configuration already handles standard use cases (e.g. independence from the specification filename).

### Generated folder structure

After generating, the API client is placed inside the folder `src/api/generated/<specification-filename>`.
The folders name is derived from the specifications' filename.

For each Spring controller a dedicated API class (`src/api/generated/<backend-artifact>/apis/*`) is generated and should be used via the provided `ApiFactory.ts` and its `getInstance` function.
All DTOs for requests and response are generated inside the `models` folder.
Field constraints of the Java DTOs (e.g. `@NotNull` or `@Size`) are respected in the generated TypeScript code as well.

### Usage of frontend without backend

If the frontend or web component is used without a backend (and therefore without an API specification), the previously mentioned scripts for generating the client inside the `package.json` needs to be adjusted.
This can be done via removing the `openapi-generator-cli` call inside the `pre-build` step.

```json:line-numbers=10
  "scripts": {
    ...
    "pre-build": "openapi-generator-cli generate", // [!code --][!code focus]
    "pre-build": "", // [!code ++] [!code focus]
    ...
  },
```

No further adjustment is needed.
